===============================
Third-party tools and resources
===============================


Plugins
=======

.. csv-table::
   :header: Name,What,Options,Doc,Author

   `gmg_localfiles <https://github.com/Velmont/gmg_localfiles>`_,"Import files from your local filesystem without duplicating them.",,`doc <https://github.com/Velmont/gmg_localfiles/blob/master/README.md>`_,odinho/Velmont
   `mediagoblin_svg <https://github.com/commonsmachinery/mediagoblin_svg>`_,SVG image support,Display previews and thumbnails as SVG,,Check README,
   `mediagoblin-hidden_original <https://gitorious.org/mediagoblin-stock/mediagoblin-hidden_original>`_,Hidden original,"Give original upload a secret url, only publish downsized version",,Unhammer 
   `mediagoblin-recaptcha <https://github.com/ayleph/mediagoblin-recaptcha>`_,`Google reCAPTCHA <https://www.google.com/recaptcha>`_ support,Enable reCAPTCHA on registration form over http/https,`doc <https://github.com/ayleph/mediagoblin-recaptcha/blob/master/README.rst>`_,Ayleph
   `mediagoblin-piwik <https://github.com/ayleph/mediagoblin-piwik>`_,`Piwik <https://piwik.org>`_ support,,`doc <https://github.com/ayleph/mediagoblin-piwik/blob/master/README.rst>`_,Ayleph
   `mediagoblin-basicsearch <https://github.com/ayleph/mediagoblin-basicsearch>`_,Search for media,,`doc <https://github.com/ayleph/mediagoblin-basicsearch/blob/master/README.rst>`_,Ayleph
   `mediagoblin-embedcode <https://github.com/mayel/mediagoblin-embedcode>`_,Display embed code for video or audio player on media page,,Check README,mayel based on proof of concept by Ayleph


Plugins (work in progress)
==========================

You're working on a plugin but it's not ready? Please let us know,cause if someone wants to make the same feature,this person will help you rather than doing the same thing from scratch ! 

.. csv-table::
   :header: Temporary name,Planned features,Repo or a place to see the WIP,Author,Status

   Raw file support for GMG, "Support NEF [done], support CR2, investigate support for other formats (if they include full-quality JPEG inside the file)",https://github.com/Velmont/mediagoblin/tree/raw_image_mediatype,odinho/Velmont,
   `Tag Cloud <https://gitorious.org/~spaetz/mediagoblin/spaetz-mediagoblin/trees/WIP/tag_cloud_plugin>`_,Add a tag cloud feature for your templates,git clone git://gitorious.org/~spaetz/mediagoblin/spaetz-mediagoblin.git HEAD:WIP/tag_cloud_plugin,Spaetz,`It works <http://www.media.sspaeth.de/u/spaetz/>`_ but still needs core modifications.
   HTML5-Multiupload,Adds a the html5 multifile input to the submit form,https://github.com/VenKamikaze/mediagoblin-html5-multi-upload,kamikaze-m,"Working on 0.4.1, but needs proper review. Test and report bugs, it might not work, but it's absolutly harmless to your MG instance"
   `MG-GIMP <http://chiselapp.com/user/saulgoode/repository/mg-gimp>`_,"Allows uploading of XCF images and GIMP resources (palettes, patterns, curves, gradients, brushes, dynamics, and tool presets). Thumbnails and previews are generated by an instance of GIMP running headlessly as a daemon",`MG-GIMP docs and code repository <http://chiselapp.com/user/saulgoode/repository/mg-gimp>`_ `Instance featuring GIMP media <http://barn.kerosenecow.net/>`_, saulgoode,Nearing completion. Still needs to be packaged for easier deployment.
   `mg-rdfa <https://github.com/commonsmachinery/mg-rdfa>`_,Embedding image metadata as RDFa,https://github.com/commonsmachinery/mg-rdfa,artfwo,"Experimental,only SVG images are supported at the moment"
   `uploadurl <https://github.com/sebastiansam55/uploadurl>`_,Upload Images via URL instead of file,https://github.com/sebastiansam55/uploadurl,sebastiansam55,Works when using browser that is logged in. Needs to use oauth or similar
   `mediagoblin-embedcode <https://github.com/ayleph/mediagoblin-embedcode>`_,Display video embed code on media page,https://github.com/ayleph/mediagoblin-embedcode,Ayleph,Initial proof of concept



Tools and utilities
===================

`automgtic <https://github.com/joar/automgtic>`_ is an automatic media uploader. It may no longer work due to API changes.


Customizations
==============

Pythonsnake has made a branch with `multi-file upload <https://github.com/pythonsnake/MediaDwarf/tree/486_multiupload>`_ (Source: `Reddit <http://www.reddit.com/r/linux/comments/1lselg/mediagoblin_050_released_with_help_from_opw_and/cc3lgu6>`_)


Articles
========

2013
----

In `Using Shotwell with MediaGoblin <https://web.archive.org/web/20190603154316/https://sjoberg.fi/blog/shotwell-mg.html>`_ (Mats Sjöberg) describes how to use the Piwigo plugin to upload images from the Shotwell photo manager.
